[Music]
when we lie our bodies get very weak for
example stick your arm out and say I
love fresh air I love fresh
air now I want you to do that while
lying and the LIE I'd like you to say is
I love to vomit say it I love to vomit
that's so weird you now say I love fresh
air I love fresh air you now say I love
to vomit I love to vomit why is that
it's because the way the brain is
structured and there are many tricks do
you want to do some more sure Martha
Beck PhD is a Harvard trained
sociologist and world renowned life
coach whose notable clients include
Oprah Winfrey her neurological based
techniques have helped individuals cope
and adapt to an anxiety addicted world
so our brains were biologically
pre-programmed to be anxious taught by
innocently believing Lies by
socialization or trauma socialization
says you're not good enough you should
try harder that was a bad choice all
kinds of things and Trauma tells you oh
my God everything's dangerous all the
time and then it creats horror stories
that haven't happened yet to make you
safe but the thing about anxiety is that
you get stuck in the anxiety spiral it
just keeps getting worse for example I
have memories and a lot of physical
scarring from sexual abuse which started
at 5 years old and then by the time I
was 30 I had depression and anxiety been
bedridden with autoimmune diseases
thinking I could just kill myself but I
can tell you with 100% certainty it is
possible to trick our brains and shut
down anxiety so if I'm feeling anxious
what would you recommend that I do
here's one of my
favorites this has always blown my mind
a little bit 53% of you that listen to
the show regularly haven't yet
subscribed to the show so could I ask
you for a favor before we start if you
like the show and you like what we do
here and you want to support us the free
simple way that you can do just that is
by hitting the Subscribe button and my
commitment to you is if you do that then
I'll do everything in my power me and my
team to make sure that this show is
better for you every single week we'll
listen to your feedback we'll find the
guest that you want me to speak to and
we'll continue to do what we do thank
you so much
Dr Martha within all your work what is
it that you're aiming to do and I guess
most
importantly equally importantly who are
you aiming to do it
for I could give you the normal answer
which goes down easily with most people
or I could give you the truth which
sounds really weird I'll take the truth
I was hoping you would say that so um in
all my work and this means from the time
I was little um I remember being
dreadfully anxious about not having done
enough toward it on the night before my
birthday one one year I was lying there
thinking I am supposed there's something
I'm supposed to help with on the earth
and I have not done enough and I've got
to get moving here and the next day I
turned
four so ever since I was little my whole
intent has been based on this feeling
that I was meant to help with a shift
that would happen in the world during my
lifetime and I did not know what it was
so I would ask myself what what is it I
would spend hours thinking what is it
and the only thing I got as an answer
was this poet this bit of poetry from TS
Elliot and it goes I said to my soul be
still and wait without love for for it
would be love of the wrong thing and
wait without hope for it would be hope
of the wrong thing there is yet Faith
but the love and the hope and the faith
are all in the waiting wait without
thought for you are not ready for
thought so the darkness shall be the
light and the Stillness the
dancing all
right as I got older and studied more I
began to think
what I'm meant to help with is a shift
in the way human beings perceive and
think and that is why I couldn't know
what it was
because to explain to someone a
fundamental shift in the way they think
would have to be processed through the
way they're thinking now and so it would
be fundamentally
misunderstood
so now I'm old and I don't care what
people think of me so I just say this
right out loud I used to it was a deep
Secret in my heart for decades and now I
just say I think there is going to be a
shift in the way in human
consciousness and I think it is going to
change the way humans relate to the
planet relate to each other relate to
themselves and I could be wrong but I
don't care I'm going to keep trying for
it till the day I
die and what is that shift in human
consciousness that you're predicting
wait without without thought but
actually no I I actually have a theory
now um my undergraduate degree was in
East Asian
studies I lived in Asia and studied
Chinese and Japanese and they have a
concept in Asia that is not well known
in modern Western culture and that is
the concept of Awakening and it's
Awakening out of the dream of thought
which is I mean the whole thing is now
like half of our listeners are at this
point probably thinking Steven has
brought a lunatic to the program I will
not listen to this episode but I'm
promising you it gets really cool if you
focus on it because when you awaken and
it's a it's a shift in the way a
fundamental perception it's also very
strong in India Tibet and the other
Buddhist countries it's a shift where
you you leave the aspects of your
thinking that cause you internal
suffering you see to suffer after you
awaken I think that's actually an
epigenetic shift that is inherent in the
brain of every individual and that many
individuals throughout history have gone
through it the great teachers uh I think
Nelson Mandela went through it in
prisent Robin Island so all over the
world in different cultures in different
parts of the world throughout history
individuals have described this
experience with very very consistent
terminology you awaken you realize that
the life you've been living is real but
only in the way a dream is real and that
the reality of the awakened state is
much more real and in that state there's
no fear there's no suffering there is
infinite compassion there is the desire
to serve there is love for all beings
not just every human but every being
there is and there is a kind of
fundamental peace and Bliss the Bliss of
being they call it in Sanskrit sa
tananda the Bliss of being becomes your
everyday
State I think if a critical number of
people experience that at the same
time we could just fix the problems
humans have been causing for the last
few thousand
years how could you persuade anybody
that that state of being is even
possible well I have a few
tricks there's no
persuading um I could show you a few
things if you want that I tend to do
when I'm coaching people so well let's
get on to that then um who are you in
terms of your
qualifications I am a person who has
experienced intense psychological and
physical suffering for decades
um absolute wreck of a human being
physically I was by the time I was 30 I
had been bedridden for 10 years with
autoimmune
diseases um had depression and anxiety
in massive amounts from the time I was
very small and then I actually had an
experience during a surgery which was
like a near-death
experience um where I felt like I saw
this light and I felt connected to it um
more than connected to it I
felt radically shifted and I came out of
that surgery and
changed I stopped telling a single lie
with any aspect of my speech
Behavior I would not lie after that so
in the next year that was a very
exciting year um I walked away from my
family religion which was very very
important in my my home community so
that meant I lost my family of origin my
community of origin every friend I'd had
before the age of 17 when I left for
college um I realized I was gay so I
left that was the end of my marriage um
I had to leave my home I had to leave my
I left
Academia basically threw everything into
the bonfire and I would not recommend
this to anyone listening out there don't
do I did this so you would not have to I
can tell you there are easier
ways but through it all through
everything I have studied with my mind
and through everything I've experienced
with my body and my
heart I'm not say I
awakened but I feel I know what
Awakening is and for that reason I feel
very safe in the world and very
joyful all I can say is this is in
you um I'm I may be able to help you
find it mhm but I I don't need to create
it who have you worked with on a
one-on-one basis what are the different
types of individuals that have asked for
your help and support everybody I mean
I've worked with homeless heroin addicts
on the streets of Phoenix because I
truly believe that the experience I had
in surgery with this light this absolute
homecoming and peace I actually
gravitated to addicts even though I've
never been addicted to substance because
when they say they can't live without
that first heroin hit that's how I felt
after coming out of that experience that
that light I was like I cannot live
without that and so I would tell the
heroin addicts I believe you're meant to
have that feeling you long for so much
but I also think you you get to keep
your teeth you know like there's another
way so I've worked with people like that
I've had had billionaires
clients I have counseled people in
prison because I'm a sociologist and if
I say something works for Humanity it
has to work across cultures and in all
situations poverty wealth captivity
Freedom um any situation it has to work
before I'll say I'll put my stamp on it
and say yeah I think that works and who
when you talk about you know helping
billionaires what do they come to you
seeking
or do they just Express symptoms or
something you know what almost everyone
has the same major problem and it's not
what you would think they want to know
their purpose they want to know why the
hell they're even here humans are the
only animals so far as we know that live
on a day-to-day basis with the
consciousness of our mortality we are
going to die so why are we even here
what am I doing here and it's it's the
same whether you're talking to someone
on the street or someone with a billion
dollars that desperation to know why
we're here and I think it comes out of a
culture that has fundamentally pulled us
away from from our inherent knowledge of
what we're meant to be and put us in a
place where we are obsessed with
productivity and consumption and
production of material
wealth and has actually cut us off off
from our own sense of meaning and that
that's actually in the brain that you
get stuck in a part of the left
hemisphere that is obsessed with
grabbing things and owning things and
controlling things and it's always
afraid it's always grasping and it
refuses to believe that anything but
itself exists but on the other side of
the
brain there is the self that connects
with meaning purpose
relationship
connection and living in a state of
nature as everyone did until a few
hundred years ago almost
everyone we would wake up a human would
wake up hearing wind and bird song and
other people's
voices they would rise and go to bed
according to the sunlight and the
temperature they had intimate
relationships with animals and with
plants and with the Earth
itself all of our biology evolved to be
in that situation we in one
Anthropologist called it the weird
societies Western educated
industrialized Rich Democratic we have a
fundamentally different way of living we
get up surrounded by artificial light we
push ourselves all day to do things that
we would never have done 300 years ago
spreadsheets um sitting next to people
we barely know who are assigned to be
there because we have similar tasks
which is a system based on Factory labor
which is horrible for people not to
solve real problems that matter to you
but to catch on to something that an
adult already knows who's going to
punish you or shame you depending on
whether you get the right answer or the
wrong it's a
bizarre very left hemosphere dominated
Society so Ian mcgilchrist my favorite
philosopher a neurologist or
psychiatrist says the whole culture
functions like someone with a severe
right hemisphere of stroke we live in a
bizarre crazy culture and we do not know
why we're here because we don't have
access to our sense of
meaning I just wanted to ask you you
know of all the things you could have
written about at this exact moment in
time you chose to write a book about
anxiety it's called Beyond anxiety
curiosity creativity and finding your
life's purpose
why did you choose that subject and
specifically this word anxiety above
everything else you could have written
about so after I wrote The Way of
Integrity where I say look if you
Integrity to me means that you are whole
and in that's the what the word means it
means intact it doesn't mean like
morally it just means structurally if
all your meaning making systems are in
order or are it's telling the same story
body heart Spirit mind if those are all
in agreement there is a kind of
grounding in reality and in that
reality what happens when you get into
that reality is you begin to awaken you
begin to experience spontaneously the
things that Eastern sages have described
about the sensation of suffering so I
was you know i' been studying toward
this for years and I thought this is the
last self-help book I'm ever going to
write because I really believe this is
it so people read the book and then they
would come to me and they'd say I have
put my whole life in Integrity but I'm
so scared all the time I am so afraid so
I started looking into it and realized
that anxiety is skyrocketing all over
the world it is by far the most common
mental health challenge that people face
something like uh 284 million people
last I checked were clinically
diagnosable with with anxiety disorder
during the pandemic year 2020 anxiety
went up all over the world by a full
25% and here's the thing about
anxiety it's like one of those Tire
rippers that you drive across and you
can't drive back because the way the
brain is structured when you get into
anxiety it just keeps going up and up
and getting worse and worse and worse
and then when you get a lot of people
who are experiencing this intense
anxiety and they can't get out of it
they create a culture that reflects
anxiety and fosters anxiety without
really meaning to but that becomes if
you're if you're stuck in this very
mechanistic grasping way of being um
anxiety is inevitable and actually lawed
so I was amazed to find that Jeff Bezos
one of the richest men in the world says
in his quarterly report and loves to say
in many settings that he tells all of
the thousands of Amazon employees who
work under him he wants them all to wake
up terrified every morning and that's
the word he uses terrified and to stay
terrified all day because that makes
them
productive but most of these people are
just getting by financially he wants
them to be afraid all the time so that
he and the stockholders
can get more stuff and they already have
so much stuff you
know like 1% of the world's people own
something like 95 no 50% of the total um
wealth of the world is owned by the top
1% it's
insane and so we're saying yes get up be
terrified as long as you're
productive and you know what but when
you get really productive and you earn a
lot of stuff and that's still your only
way of being you still wake up terrified
every morning and you st stay anxious
all day long fear see fear is like being
shot from a cannon if a bear came in
here we would both go whoa and we'd get
very clear instructions from our biology
to either fight flee freeze you know
hide under the table I would feed you to
the bear good luck with that good luck
with that I'm double your weight you
could totally take that bear I'm not
going to risk it I'd be out of here no
you would you would win anyway it would
eat me and then you would win
yeah and then our fear if we were like
other animals would subside M that's
normal fear an anxiety instead of being
like shot from a cannon it's like being
haunted something bad happens or we hear
about something bad happening and we get
that jolt of fear but instead of acting
and then relaxing we turn it into a
verbal story so a group of psychologists
um I think in the 90s decided to try to
figure out why humans of all animals are
the only ones who commit suicide on a
regular basis and what they found out
the answer is
language we humans have the capacity to
use language to create an abstract
vision of the future
that is more horrifying than the
prospect of Our Own Death we choose
death over the story of fear that we
carry in our minds and the spiral
happens because there's a jolt of fear
then a story about the fear and then
there's a story about how we have to
control the world so that we won't be in
danger anymore and we have to control
our loved ones so they want me in danger
and we have to control we just have to
control
but we honest to God really can't
control very much so then we get worried
we get even more scared and that feeds
back into these primitive brain
structures that say fear and then it
creates a bigger story and a more
control efforts and it goes up and up
and up and it doesn't go down because
that part of the brain has a very
peculiar I don't know how this evolved
it has this tendency to to truly believe
that nothing but itself
exists so you're going to have to
explain the brain to me in the context
you're describing it for me to
understand some of Point um tell me what
I need to know about the brain I'm going
to draw a little picture of it on my
iPad here so I can stay with you all
right so you've got your brain and it's
it's uh symmetrical right yeah to mirror
image there something in the middle
called the Corpus colosan that connects
it and I'm about to vastly oversimplify
and I'm not a neuroscientist so
neurologists I I beg you to forgive me
uh I know that the whole brain is
working almost all the time and that
left right uh
simplifications about the hemispheres of
the brain are
oversimplifications nevertheless there
are very dramatic differences between
what happens and so I'm going to talk to
those so on the left side you have this
thing called the anxiety spiral where
there's a little tiny part of your brain
called the amydala and it's very
primitive every animal with a spine has
one of these um or something very close
to it and its job is to make you safe by
being alarmed when you see unfamiliar
things it feeds information to layers of
the brain that are also ancient but not
as old and these on the left hemisphere
make you immediately start thinking of
ways to control a situation and then
when it gets to the outermost layer of
the left hemisphere which handles things
like time and language it starts to tell
a story defending the feelings it's
having so that's what the left
hemisphere does in this one little
compartment on the right side you also
have an amigdala you actually have two
of all these structures on the right
side the amydala also goes ah something
unfamiliar little burst
of then
and the right side it creates
curiosity instead of
aversion have you ever rubber necked at
an accident is that when you're like
what look yeah everybody slows down and
you're like what what happened what
happened course and and I always think
oh I should look away this is I'm being
like vois but I still really want to
look and the reason is that we evolved a
tendency to move away from frightening
things to be safe but toward them in so
far as we can figure out what happened
and avoid that happening to us so
curiosity is intense around Things We
Fear that's why the the average American
Child by the time they're ready for
college has witnessed on TV or or online
16,000 or is it 60,000 murders we're
terrified of murder so we're obsessed
with it you do not have mystery stories
written about robbery it's murder okay
so the right side of migul goes
curious and then it starts to connect
things how can I figure this out that's
like that other thing so this is what
must have happened it's a
detective and it starts to put together
its own version of what happened doesn't
use language but it uses very Vivid
images and sensory details and it can
connect connect things in ways that are
highly original and inventive so you
immediately start to get
creative what I found in in the
wonderful books I wrote I read about
anxiety they always talked about how to
get your anxiety to calm
down but for me that wasn't enough as an
individual or just as a
theoretician because that just gets you
to the you flatten your anxiety but if
you go into the right hemisphere of your
brain and start to get creative
something really magical happens just as
anxiety shuts off
creativity creativity can shut down
anxiety it's like these two parts of the
brain
toggle and if you go to any traditional
culture you will find the Wise people
the elders the medicine people of that
culture talking about the Oneness of all
things it's not a New Concept
what I realized is that if I
deliberately chose to push my brain
toward
creativity and get the right side moving
my anxiety shut down and then I started
testing it on clients and on groups of
people online I'd design these you know
experiments because I was trained as a
sociologist and consistently I found
that this is the way to get rid of this
horrific scourge that is ruining so many
people's lives and what I always hear is
people say well there are real problems
we really should be
afraid my answer to that is if you were
in a horrible car accident God forbid
and you had many
injuries would you want the surgeons
working on you to be in a state of panic
or calm
creativity the only way we're going to
fix the problem we've made with our
fear-based
Behavior the only way to solve problems
this big is to access the incredible
capacity of human
creativity I believe we can do that as
individuals and as a
species so how would I go about
switching into this right hemisphere if
I'm feeling anxious what would you
recommend that I do it's so easy it's so
amazingly easy
now your brain naturally goes toward
anxiety because of something called the
negativity bias and I always think of it
as 15 puppies in a Cobra if I gave you a
box and it had 15 puppies and a cobra in
it what would catch your attention the
snake and that's because in evolutionary
terms paying attention to the SN snake
is a good idea yeah but um it we have
such a strong negativity bias in our
culture and we very little to pull us
back into communion with Oneness we
don't have nature around us anymore so
we have to do that we can trick our
brains into doing that and if you want
to play a little with this sure okay
tell me what to do first I want you to
think of something that makes you feel a
bit anxious maybe not panicky but
anxious and something you're willing to
like tell us what it is okay um
something that makes me feel a little
bit anxious yeah
this is an interesting one
um sounds like a strange thing to say
but um when my partner is not
happy and I know she's not happy but
she's not telling me why and I'm around
her and I can tell from her vibe her
face she's not happy about something and
I have no idea what it is okay I think
there will be many people out there who
know what this feels like yeah you are
describing a domestic a tiny domestic
nightmare that many of us feel so think
about that think about what that feels
like and just notice what it does to
your body and to your emotions MH what's
happening in your body if you're in that
situation with your partner like my
breath is short uhhuh yeah right I just
feel tense and I I become quite
impatient because I just need the answer
to like alleviate the anxiety yeah so
you've gone to a fight ORF flight nous
system arousal State okay uhuh something
something's wrong okay I'm very focused
yeah yeah I'm very focused and I'm very
like I'm anxious but I'm also a little
bit snappish because I'm I'm F fleeing
on one side I need to get out of this
situation but I'm fighting on the other
side like tell me what's wrong so you've
got a full fight ORF flight thing
happening so you can get into that by
imagining the situation now I want you
to imagine something else very vividly
um and it would probably help if you
close your eyes um have you ever eaten
an orange yeah all right so imagine that
you are holding an orange MH um it's a
nice ripe heavy delicious orange at the
peak of its ripeness I can tell you
you've already smelled it so you can
smell the Citrus you just take a bite of
it to break the seal of the of the
peeling and just feel that little spray
of citric acid that pops up when you
bite the peel and then the bitterness of
the
Rind and then as you bite in the juice
gets in your mouth it's sweet it's a
little bit
Tangy uh you can feel the filaments of
the skin and the stringiness of the
insides and you can pull it back you
pull back the peel you can feel it on
your fingernails you can smell it um put
just put the broken part to your mouth
and like squeeze the orange and let some
juice get into your mouth and taste it
completely and then swallow it and then
enjoy the sensation of tasting feeling
hearing even this
experience okay how's your anxiety my
anxiety went away it's gone yeah because
I asked you to use sensory imagination
mhm and that's handled by the right
hemisphere it's not in the left so
instead of verbal imagination which can
create horror stories you were in a
sensory
experience and what I don't think people
realize is that we're always imagining
what's going to happen to us in the next
few days weeks months years but we're
imagining it based on what we think is
real which is all the horror stories
we're hearing about oh you know I need
to mind my health I need to there will
be accidents there will will be you know
my loved ones will die we have all these
stories that we haven't happened yet
they may they're not lies but that's in
the mind as we make our choices I need
to get more money that whole
thing when you imagine forward with your
senses in a way that brings relaxation
how's your body when you're in the
orange thing you said it was tense when
you're in anxiety what happens to your
physical body when you're
completely connected to the experience
of this imaginary orange relaxes your
body relaxes yeah you start breathing
more deeply you stop producing all the
the cortisol the GL glucocorticoids the
adrenaline that you had in the fight
flight State and now you're starting to
produce serotonin and dopamine and and
the what they call the tend and befriend
hormones so you're say if you say you
could hold that in energy and your
partner is still tense and running
around but you're staying in
this relaxed
State can you then instead of being
afraid of her start to be curious about
what's going on instead of saying tell
me what's going on it's more like wow
she's really T I wonder what that's
about and you could even ask her
honey I don't want to step on your toes
here but the vibe I'm getting is that
you're not okay like can I help you so
it's a very very different thing to
approach conflict um one of the people I
wrote about in this book is Chris Voss
one of the FBI's top hostage
negotiators and when he's dealing with a
violent
Psychopathic terrorist who has people as
hostages he's ready to kill Chris Voss
says this is how you deal with
him gently
with a soft voice curious about his
experience and empathetic about it and
you're just thinking what this is not in
the
movies but the human amydala is a
frightened animal most of the time and
we all know that if you run at a
frightened animal and say tell me what
you want it doesn't get less
frightened so what you just did was move
your nervous system into a state
where you can be a field of Peace for
someone else who's anxious do you have
to do the orange thing the whole time to
get into that state no no no there are
many tricks do you want to do some more
sure
let all right here's one of my
favorites um and I got this from a
brilliant artist and professor at
Harvard William Ryman who I was his
lucky enough to be his teaching
assistant for a few years and this is
one of the things that he used to do to
get the students to shut down the the
left side of their brain well not shut
it down but to use the right side of the
brain as well because the left side of
the brain can't draw very well I have to
tell you this so all I want you to do is
put your stylus there over toward the
right uh Center of your field Y and
write your first name the way you
usually sign
it yeah all right the way I usually sign
it or write it the way you usually sign
it
okay yeah okay so the way I usually sign
it is a bit more licated o that's
beautiful okay so now put your P your
stylist just to the left of the
signature and now replicate the
signature but this time write it in
Mirror writing back cords take as much
time as you need gosh take as much time
as you need so difficult just breathe
wait I've got it wrong already can I rub
out absolutely you have as many tries as
you need
suar notice how the rhythm of your hand
goes when you're signing moving right
and try to see if you can find that
rhythm going the opposite direction I
might need pen and paper using pencil
and paper because they're tactile yeah
is actually you're going to have easier
access to it because you're have you're
going to have more access to the right
side of your brain this is so difficult
why is my signature so so complicated
you're doing brilliantly
you did it terrible yay no not terrible
now but the torture is not over Stephen
it's terrible it's beautiful you said
you wouldn't lie I I just SP your I just
meant your first name anyway okay is
good now while you were doing that you
might have felt intense frustration and
a sense of but when when you're anxious
about it you actually can't do it you
have to become engrossed with it in
order to do it because your brain is
creating new neurons synapses that have
never existed before you've never done
this before so you are fundamentally
changing your brain teaching in a skill
it has never had and this is what
children are going through when they
learn to write for the first time but
what you just did was connect to parts
of the brain that are in the right side
so this is why we used to make these
poor students do this because once they
could we had another book we worked with
called Drawing is forgetting the name of
what you see as long as you call it a
cup you can't draw it you draw your
image of a cup but when you forget to
call it anything it just becomes a shape
like your signature had to just become a
shape and shapes are on the right
hemisphere so what you just did was a
it's it's like
powerlifting you forced your brain to
create synapses that were brand new that
were taking you into a state of learning
deep
learning similar to what happens to
Children if you let them run around in
nature so there was a study done at Nasa
in the 60s to identify creative
Geniuses and they found that two% of the
adults they sought out like college
graduates were creative geniuses after a
while a few years they decided to try
giving it to four and fiveyear olds 98%
of them were creative
Geniuses and I think that probably the
other 2% were just having a bad
day what
happens between the moment you're four
years old a full-on creative genius
learning new things the way you just did
day and day out and adulthood where your
genius has mainly gone dark
it's because you stop trying things that
are brand new like that you're put in
the factory line in school and taught to
learn in a completely different way
that's based on shame and fear and
artificial skills that don't mean much
to you and right and wrong answers yeah
everything's right or wrong everything's
very judgmental in nature nothing's
judgmental um uh one of the things I've
done with groups of clients is take them
into a forest and uh with the help of my
uh another coach who's a great Woodsman
we have them we give them the tools to
make fire with sticks and rocks but they
have to work as a team and then we say
make fire but you can't talk about it
because language is in the left
hemisphere and sometimes they're out
there for four hours and the whole time
it's like ah what are we doing they try
all these different things and then I've
never had a group that didn't do it they
figure it out and you end up with a
little um flame in your hands and you
feed it a few bits of dried Moss or
whatever and you blow into it and it
starts to smoke and then smoke heavily
and then suddenly it just bursts into
flame and there's this feeling there's
this Promethean feeling oh my God we can
do
anything and
the fact that that's how we're built to
learn and there's joy in it there's a
kind of it's an achievement but Nature's
not saying wrong right you get a you get
an F you get an A you get higher levels
no you get fire or you don't get fire no
judgment so what does this mean for me
on a like day-to-day basis if I
understand the power of this does this
mean that I I should draw my name a lot
or is there something that I that we can
all be doing to alleviate our anxiety
and to get us into the right hemisphere
of our brain well there's to me there's
a three-step process and there are three
sections in the book the first one I I
use it with the acronym cat calm art and
Transcendence this is how it works the
first third of the book is just how to
calm your brain it's been taught to be
anxious um it is biologically
pre-programmed to be anxious so to calm
it down most people will say they'll
come in and tell me I want to fight my
anxiety I want to get it I want to end
it I want to bring it down I want it
gone because they think it's a broken
machine but it's not a broken machine
it's a frightened animal and if if you
came in and I said to you okay I want to
end you I want to bring you down I'm
going to fight you till you're gone
would you be less afraid or more
afraid so they're attacking the part of
themsel that's anxious and it makes it
more anxious
so and that's what we're taught to do
end it force it to calm down with
chemicals one of the most ghastly things
that ever happened in the in Psychiatry
was that they used to literally take
people who had you know inexurable uh
anxiety and literally put a screwdriver
through the eye socket and up into the
brain and just mix it
around that's how mechanistic we are
about our own
Minds we can fix it with a screwdriver
that's a very left hemisphere way to
think and it's literally attacking
ourselves but we're all we're all born
with the intrinsic knowledge of how to
calm a frightened animal so if you found
a terrified puppy on your stoop one
morning and you decided to try to help
it you would instinctively know that how
to do that what what would you do um
I would approach it slowly or not
approach it at all and I would get down
yes and I'd be very gentle and say hello
not ask it to come to me yeah and if it
didn't you'd give it space you'd give it
time you'd sit there with it yeah and
just the way your energy just changed
now you get down you begin to smile in a
very sweet way and I could feel the
tolerance and the gentleness and the
space that you would give this creature
we've got to learn to be gentle to
ourselves we are taught to be violent to
ourselves biohack that make you know
make yourself eat this and do that
and and instead if we could just go to
the anxious part like say you're with
your partner and she's acting weird and
you're feeling
anxious generally what we do is we try
to control the situation what can I do
can I make her happy I'll bring her
flowers I'll do whatever right have an
argument
instead of trying to control her the
best approach is go inside find the part
of yourself that's
afraid so if you're in that situation
and she's nervous and you just start to
observe your own
anxiety like okay what does that feel
like who is that in there who's who's
the anxious part of me and just notice I
mean try it right now if you don't
mind she's upset she's t she's not
telling you the problem notice the
anxiety where is it in your body
exactly it's like here in my chest okay
in your chest so allow that and say to
it I'm going to give you space I'm here
I'm going to be here with you uh I know
she's scaring you but I've got you it's
okay she's not going to hurt us I can go
in the other room with you if you need
and sit with it and say let me know what
what are you
feeling tell me everything you get to
feel exactly the way you
feel and I'm here to listen to anything
you want to tell me and I will not hurt
you and I will not try to stifle you or
make you go
away so how does that change anything
yeah for some reason it just um the
volume went down so describe it it's
just like the volume is went down it
made me wonder if just because just by
you saying that made me wonder if if in
those moments I should be writing it out
that can be really helpful there's a
psychologist named James Panabaker who
found that if he just had students he
just did this experiment once as a
graduate student he had students write
for 15 minutes about something that was
upsetting to them and many of them came
out of the experiment in tears it really
upset them for an hour or two he had
other students just write what they did
last summer or
whatever so there was this brief period
where the ones who had stirred up some
turmoil felt
unsettled but they in the in the weeks
and even the years subsequent to that
experiment they had fewer doctor's
visits they had less anxiety they had
better relationships they had better
everything so he for his whole career
just did these writing exercises where
we he would have people just Express
themselves
not to show anyone not even to
reread just to express MH the parts of
us that are frightened needs need to be
heard the parts of society that are
hurting need to be heard I'm astonished
by the um Truth and Reconciliation
councils held in South Africa after
Nelson Mandela became president these
people who had been
through absolute
atrocities and they were just heard they
were allowed to tell their stories to
the people who had hurt them and other
people who were on their side and the
telling of
it avoided you know what everyone
thought would be a blood bath and it it
of course didn't fix all the problems
but it unburdened to a large extent
people who had been through things that
I can't even imagine so yes write it
write it down so she's in the other room
she's acting weird
something might come up about like how
old is that anxious part maybe it's
young maybe it's
not you said something at the start you
said that
um anxiety is like driving over a metal
spike in those police like chases that's
what I was thinking about like the
police chases where they throw out the
metal spikes and the car over why why
did you use that analogy what are you
what are you saying there about the
nature of anxiety that's what it's like
if you get stuck in what it's called the
anxiety spiral uh in the brain the
anxiety cycle some people call it um so
what you have to do in that situation is
to extend the metaphor get out of the
car disarm the mechanism get that
mechanism out of the way you know the
the tire ripping thing and then you can
back out but the stopping and getting
out that's the calming step of anxiety
and that's what you're doing here as
weird as it sounds when you write your
name back backwards and you come into a
state of physiological calm you are
getting rid of the tire rippers You're
Building Pathways that go into the
calmer parts of the brain so um the same
thing when you were imagining eating an
orange you're calming yourself and it it
allows you to
reverse it allows you to leave finally
but our culture tends to not allow you
to leave it's always telling you horror
stories so then once you get really
calm and you've taken care of that part
of yourself I said the acronym is C
cat once you get to calm then very
paradoxically it blew me away when I
realized this then you need art and I
don't mean drawing I mean making things
making things in three dimensions making
events happen making a podcast like what
was the fire in you that made you make
things and how did it feel when you were
in the
making in the making it usually feels
great yeah like in the process of making
actually me and my partner went and did
um last weekend we went and made some
art and I was like stressed and stuff
and so when we went and did this art I'd
like never painted in my life yeah so we
went to this like random Loft and there
was this guy there and uh he had these
massive two pieces of cardboard and like
loads of spray cans and paint and stuff
and we just painted for maybe 3 hours or
something yeah and I was totally lost in
it I mean that's the way people describe
it they describe it as being lost in it
right yeah and do you know that if
people have been through a trauma and
they're allowed to draw about it even if
they can't draw you know
professionally they have an 80% lower
chance of developing PTSD there's
something about creating stuff and it
could be a company or it could be a
spray paint on a cardboard
um my partner um started making bead
bracelets a while ago she's very busy
she doesn't have time for this but it
makes her
so content and we were talking about how
if you go into a tomb in Egypt from
5,000 years ago what are you going to
find among other things beaded bracelets
if you go to the Amazon rainforest and
contact an uncontacted tribe what might
you find beaded bracelets people are
making beaded bracelets all the time and
they serve no function they are precious
pointless things she said that we make
and all cultures make we make music I
mean I think about the cultures in
Jamaica one of the worst slavery
colonies in the history of the world it
it was just it made what was happening
on the mainland look gentle by
comparison and out of that you get these
incredible art forms
reggae Dance I mean like in the middle
of
being crushed having literally
everything taken from them people were
still making
art this is a part of the human spirit
that is just it's indomitable and our
culture pushes it to the fringes okay
Stephen you can do that on a weekend
that's nice but did you really make any
money you know get a real job yeah how
does this link again back to the brain
so if I'm creating I'm making some art I
was doing that spray paint thing with
the paint in the I'll show a picture of
it after I actually think cool I want to
see but how is that helping me to calm
my anxiety it's because of the way the
structures on the left side um they're
obsessed with grasping um material
objects acquiring controlling other
people always thinking about fear
and there does seem to be this toggle
effect that anxiety and creativity just
can't work at the same time so the
moment you begin to create like when you
said I could write this that's
expressive writing that's artistic
writing and all of a sudden the toggle
switches off in anxiety and on in
creativity so I believe that there's
another Spiral on the right side of the
brain but instead of spiraling tightly
into fear it spirs it it spirals
outward and ultimately you get to the
final thing there's calming there's
Artistry and then there's
Transcendence or Awakening when you're
there sometimes we call it Flo chicks at
Nei the psychologist who named it Flo um
really looked into this and it's a state
of creating and performing at a level so
difficult we almost can't do it the
exactly the way you were writing your
name it's
like and you can have what's called The
Rage to master where you're just like
I'm
can't but when you get it and I'm sure
you've had this with many things you've
created in your life it's like flying
it's heaven and there's a time in the
process of creation creating where the
sense of self Falls away and the sense
of control isn't necessary and what you
feel is creation itself sort of moving
with you and through you and it's
Blissful and I believe that is the state
in which we are meant to spend almost
all our time and I think that would
transform our Consciousness this is a
related but slightly unrelated um topic
but there's a lot of people and certain
demographic suffering in different ways
at the moment yes there's like a
conversation I hear a lot about men
suffering with meaning and purpose and
those things and I hear this other
conversation about young women suffering
and depression anxiety being on the rise
there when you think about those two
group groups so like men and young women
what is it that you think is the cause
causal factor of their suffering because
their suffering is similar and different
yeah well it's it's conditioned by the
way the brain works it works very
differently in pubescent girls than it
does in say adult men young adult men
their brains work very differently from
Elders that's why in traditional
societies the young men would be herded
together and sometimes for example in
some cultures their faces would be
scared they would leave their name
behind they would leave all the
possessions they had or burn them and
they would be taken into the Wilderness
by the elders and the elders would
proceed to scare The Living Daylights
out of them making strange noises in the
brush um putting them through a kind of
trial and the result of this is it kind
of disintegrates the ego and you still
see it in like if you see movies about
the the Army and how the the tough but
Heart of Gold Sergeant breaks down the
young soldiers egos so that they finally
say okay I am not the center of the
universe I need my brothers to exist and
I I bow down in the face of nature which
is greater than I am and then the elders
say all right now you're ready to be a
man go back to the village and tell
people your new name which you get to
choose young girls at puberty go through
the opposite experience in many cultures
they are isol ated in places away from
All Humans because the primary
psychological task According to some
theories of males is that they're born
sort of differentiated and very
individual and they need to learn to
integrate with other people to be
whole females tend to be born or people
identified as female are born very
integrated and the task of female
maturation is to
individuate so young girls who haven't
they're just at the stage where they
need to find out who they are as an
individual and instead they're very
integrated with networks of people who
are psychologically attacking each other
in ways that are extremely harmful to
their psyche at that stage in a
traditional culture they might be put in
say a hut that was dark and given food
every day but you're in there by
yourself to until you learn I'm okay I
can actually go inside myself and find
the truth of who I am on the other hand
the boys are out there going ah I can
give up thinking I'm all that and I can
kneel in reverence at the Oneness of it
all and then they come back together and
they've got a lot in common at that
point because the men now realize they
need people and the women I realize that
they're having Independence exactly and
so each can understand the other better
I mean the wisdom of these cultural
Traditions is incredible and we just
don't have it we don't have it the the
internet in particular spins out the the
individuation of young men makes them
feel like you know they do have bands
and brothers but it's like we're under
attack man and I really I'm gonna try to
I have to achieve I'm going to try it
this way and I'm G to try it that way
and there's a lot of battle games and
stuff but none of the humility that
comes from the elders MH and these young
girls are just caught in horal Winds of
social toxicity when they might be
taught to
meditate and we can still do all those
things we can still access those things
you talked about suicidal ideation
earlier on being unique to humans when
we think about suicidal ideation it's
part particularly prominent in young men
I think in the UK the stat is still the
case that the single biggest killer of
young men is themselves under the age of
wow so why why is that you know we
talked about meaning and purpose and
stuff earlier why are young men killing
themselves at alarming
race because it is easier in the mind to
take arms against a sea of troubles like
it's Hamlet speech you know why should I
stay alive in a world where everyone
dies and we're all assaulted by the
slings and arrows of Outrageous Fortune
he's just watched his father die and
he's like why would I keep going I could
just kill myself because men are taught
combat as a way of control if you're
afraid every movie will tell you get a
gun like the Matrix where the guy learns
he can control everything with his mind
everything he's controlling with his
mind so what does he do he says we're
going to need a lot of guns you can
control the universe with your mind you
don't need guns right but there's just
this obsession with weaponry and that's
kind of in the DNA but when you get
people in a spiral of fear it becomes
intense and Military all the genocides
committed throughout history have relied
on like really toxic leaders accessing
vulnerable young men and militarizing
them against other people which is
really easy and if they're on their own
isolated and there are no Elders taking
them in groups doing things they turn
that on themselves so what is the what
is the solution then for young men uh I
would say look to our ancestors you know
let's take young men um the the coach
Michael trada that I used to go with to
make fire in the woods he originally
worked with and probably still does work
with groups of young men and he used to
wear us uh he was he was a disciple of
um I think it was the Odawa tribe of
indigenous Americans and he always wore
this shirt that said listen to
grandfather and he would take these
confused hurting young men out and he
would put them through the trials that
they would have had in a traditional
society and they would have to learn to
make fire together and they would have
to learn to feed each other what they
could find and um use their skills in
hunting building all of that for the
community and I just watched him heal
boy after boy after
boy and it that's not that hard to do
why is it he healing for them doing that
using their skills hunting surviving
because it's what we evolved to do like
the lives we're giving people now the
lives most of us are living are so
alienating it's such an abnormal this
here is not
normal right this is not a forest or a
beach or a desert this is all man-made
it's full of right angles which don't
even very rarely exist in nature only in
crystals for people that AR watching
video she's pointing at the studio yeah
I'm pointing at the studio which is
Lovely by the way absolutely
state-of-the-art
but if you talk about human evolution
and the incredible sophisticated nervous
systems we have they evolved intimately
for a totally different environment and
this is is scary so what do we do about
it because you know the more I listen to
you I think maybe I should run away like
maybe I should I have the funds to run
away I could I could go forever and I do
wonder I go probably be happier maybe
maybe I'd start creating though and then
this is what I said I did a solo episode
on my podcast recently I said if I ran
away then I'd start creating and then
you know I might start a podcast on the
beach in barley and then you would you
would create stuff you can't help
yourself and that's why you are
obviously like physically healthy you
seem incredibly balanced and wise like
you've been making stuff so you're very
much like your sorry to use California
language but your energy is very calm
but also very
exuberant your
story is um is heartbreaking in many
ways but it's it's so evidently shaped
the person that sits in front of me
today because you're at a very young age
which you've not we've not really spoken
about much you were part of the Mormon
religion oh yes I
was take me into that before 10 years
old how that experience before the age
of 10 has shaped the person you are so I
was born not just into a Mormon um
family but a Mormon Community where
everyone shared the same beliefs you
didn't call people um Mr and M it was
brother and sister brother Smith sister
Smith um and
I was told from very young I mean you're
indoctrinated at 18 months you start
religious training and they tell you
things like um you know if men live well
and they're part of the Mormon church
then when they die they get their own
planet and all the women they want I
like all right like you're three years
old what do you know right and Jesus is
going to come over the mountains and all
the graves are going to fly open and all
the bodies the literal bodies of all the
dead people are going to rise up out and
go join Jesus which is why we don't
cremate bodies we bury them because
they're gonna come back to
life and um I would have nightmares of
Jesus coming over the mountains the
graves flying open all the people around
me are rising up and I would run as a
little kid this happened over and over
again this dream where I was trying to
jump high enough to go with the people
who were being saved and I couldn't do
it I was I just kept coming back down so
I lived in absolute Terror all the time
and I also didn't know what was real
because none of it nothing felt
real so that was it's very disconcerting
but because I'd never had any other
experience I just thought well this is
life so that was rough and at 28 years
old you realized that you'd been
sexually assaulted as a child yeah I
think I had
I had hints of it actually friends told
me that I had told them about it in high
school and I don't remember telling them
so I had pretty much repressed it my
father was a very very
renowned um scholarly defender of
Mormonism his job was to take the claims
of the doctrine and validate them you
know
academically but in order to do that I
talked to many people who many of he had
five people working with him to help him
translate various documents of different
languages and they said he would just
make things up and put them as footnotes
in different languages so no one was
likely to check them um and it was
called lying for the
Lord which is so weird I mean it means
you have a god who's fundamentally
interested in helping people be like God
by lying
so yeah I was twisted in knots um when I
was little and then I think it twisted
my father into knots as well and I do
have memories and a lot of physical
scarring from sexual abuse that sort of
blew up in my into my
Consciousness right after I had that um
the light experience that came to me in
surgery and um it actually told me
during the surgery you're about to go
through something very very difficult
but I've always been with you and I'll
always be with you never forget
that and that's why I decided not to lie
anymore and that's why when I started
having these
memories it didn't matter
because because connection with that
light and never forgetting it was the
realest maybe the only absolutely true
thing that had ever happened to me and I
was not leaving again abuse at the hands
of your father yes yeah and you
remembered that at 28 years old yeah you
recalled it at 28 years old it well it
it sort of exploded into my mind at
they're called intrusive flashbacks um
I'd had a lot of lot of symptoms of PTSD
my whole life without knowing it but my
oldest child got to be the age I was
when the abuse started occurring 5 years
old and she looked just like me at that
age and it every time I looked at her I
would just have these incredibly violent
it's not like a memory it's like it's
happening it's like you're completely
overwhelmed by it um for a period of
time and it was it was extraordinarily
hard I'm not going to lie it was bad and
I called my mother and and she said well
yes that's what happened I was like what
you agree with me and she said why
shouldn't I I know him better than you
and I said okay so like what do I do and
she said well obviously you have to
protect the church you called your
mother to tell her you've been sexually
abused and you realized and she said yes
she knows well she called me and said
what's going on why why are you not
visiting us and I said all right I had
taken a vow not to lie so I told her the
truth expecting her to go into a rage or
something and she said well yeah that's
how it is um she said well yeah that's
how it is yeah I believe you that's that
sounds right that tracks what how how
did it track what did she know she said
I know him better than you do and I said
I don't remember this was 30 years ago
but I said
um he's really he's not an honest man
and she said no he's not
honest and then she said you better come
and make him a
cake which
is is weird frankly to say yes I believe
you were raped by your father at the age
of five and by the way the surgery I was
in when I had the light experience was
surgery to correct some of the scar
tissue left by the abuse I was it had
ripped internally and I was bleeding
internally and they just found all this
scar tissue and um where it probably
shouldn't have been
and so for a mother to sayoh yeah I
completely believe that's true and what
I think you should do about it is to
make your perpetrator a
cake kind of sums up the way I was
raised and I just I tried I made the
cake I went down I served the cake and
then I just couldn't go back I just
couldn't did you confront him I did yeah
um I confronted him at first and then
you years later 10 years later or so
when he was 90 91 I was born when he was
52 and
[Music]
um uh I wanted to meet with him after
I'd forgiven him to tell him that I'd
forgiven him so that he would not have
to carry that because he was a very very
miserable strange disassociated human
being like really really weird um people
he was brilliant but very very very
broken and um I think he had to choose
between his entire sense of reality and
his religion and he chose the religion
and he chose the job of talking other
people into believing the religion and I
think it just completely broke him and
that plus um he was in World War II and
saw a lot of action there and he was I
forgive him you know by the way anyone
listening to this you do know not have
to forgive your
perpetrator find a way to be in your own
truth in your own Integrity you will
heal you will be happier then you will
notice that there is no more anything to
forgive you're done did he acknowledge
that he had done it no
um it's very strange about it though he
didn't
say I never did that he said oh but that
was the evil
one meaning the devil and that was my
family was that I'd been sexually
assaulted by the devil as a child and
that that's why I had scars and so on
and so he said yeah that was the evil
one I think meaning the devil but maybe
he meant part of him that was evil he
never really talked to me my whole life
we never had like conversations he would
switch languages he would literally
physically run away from me it was very
very strange yeah wasn't a normal
childhood or adulthood
and after that phone call with your
mother where you confronted her about it
and she said that sounds about right um
I read that she then denied after oh she
totally retracted it yeah I mean she had
to live with him and she couldn't very
well like agree with me in his presence
so um when I asked her I I met with both
of them in my therapist's office and I
saidh did you tell me that you've agreed
with me and that it made sense to You'
and she said oh I just assumed you were
joking which was like nah that
no so did she ever admit that she had
said that no she never did I never saw
her again and but actually I have to say
if I had to as a child if I had to
choose one of my parents to be around it
would have been my father because my
mother
was just a big ball of misery and rage
and I never once remember feeling safe
around her why she I I had the distinct
impression she hated me really yeah
because Mormons believe that children
choose to be born to specific parents
and so and she had had five children and
one still birth and her body was over it
and she was done and she was sick and
depressed and miserable and then she had
three more children I was seventh of the
eight surviving children and the last
four of us she was really angry that we
had forced ourselves upon her she did
not want us and she was angry because we
had been born and she was depressed
right I I read was reading through your
story about how she spent a lot of time
in bed upset crying yeah like all the
time I had a weird privilege of watching
her funeral funeral on um what do they
call it closed circuit TV during the
pandemic or just after um one of my
sisters had gotten back in touch with me
over after 30 years of no contact and it
was the strangest thing because I was
going to go do something that day and
then I thought no I've got to go lie
down in bed which I don't do and then
I've got to watch TV which I never do
during the day and then I got a text
from my sister saying our mom's funeral
is on TV right now at this link so I sat
there and I watched it and it was quite
validating one of my brothers got up and
started out by saying if you came here
expecting to hear stories of motherly
love you are at the wrong funeral really
yeah and
and my siblings said things like it's so
much that she was depressed it was kind
of like depression is who she was
was it was I feel
tremendous sadness for my mother
tremendous compassion and empathy to the
point I mean
heartbroken about the life she lived and
the life that many other women live sort
of in Crazy systems feeling they have no
power
um it just destroyed me to to feel how
much pain she was in but uh yeah she
didn't like
me did you ever figure out why your
parents were they way that they were
outside of the influence of the religion
was there anything that happened to them
oh yeah tons of things like they were um
my grandmother my mother's mother I
think was a complete psychopath she was
pr- naazy in World War II she I what
like who does that she was Swedish and
she just thought that was the right
thing to do um was there a suspicion
that your dad was abused oh he was
definitely abused by his mother he was
sexually abused by his yes yes and that
was known my mother had told me this
before um yeah she would do horrible
things she would put she would wound him
and put be Venom on his genitals and um
be very sexual toward him I mean it was
a mess it was
horrible the the things that happened to
at that age they left their fingerprints
on you as you went through your teen
years oh yeah I I was listening to an
interview you did where you were
describing being I think 17 18 years old
and you were thinking about ending your
own life oh constantly constantly yeah
like it was a daily struggle not to
through through what period of your life
I would say
about 16 well it started right around 13
but by the time I was 16 it was pretty
constant 17 189 it
was all I could do to not commit suicide
and then um it kind of went on it went
to a level of like I can hang on during
my
20s but I think I was 32 the day I
realized it was the first day I
remembered that I hadn't wanted to kill
myself yeah why why do you think that
was so present in your life those
thoughts because I was in tremendous
amounts of physical and psychological
pain and are the two linked they were
for me yeah they were very much um
psychogenic pain you know the body mind
interface is not there's not much
separation and for me one of the things
I talked about in the way of Integrity
is that when we lie our bodies get very
weak so um like I could do a simple
little hokey test with you where I could
oh you want to do it okay so stick your
arm out yeah and hold it up don't let me
push it down okay don't let me push down
yeah okay got that now I want you to do
that while lying and the LIE I'd like
you to say is I love to
vomit okay I love to vomit say it
holding your arm up yeah say it I love
to vomit why that's so weird now say I
love fresh
air um I love fresh I love fresh
air yeah I'm trying my very heart say it
again I love fresh air now say I love to
vomit I love to vomit why is that that's
so strange this is why polygraph
machines work on everybody with
Psychopaths just for people that
couldn't see that because they were
listening when I don't know if I've just
been like messed with in some way but
when I said I love to
vomit I she could push my hand down but
when I said I love fresh air she
couldn't push my hand down and she was
trying both times she was pushing hard
both times and I would think that I'd be
able to resist both forces but when I
said I love to vomit it was like the
only way I can describe it was I wasn't
actually connected to my strength and my
hand exactly I wasn't it was like I was
inside my head so I couldn't also at the
same time think about you you're about
to push me right it was like there was
two different systems yes because the
body lives in reality the body is honest
only the mind and only the verbal mind
can lie to us and tell us things um that
we we can believe even though they're
not true so I love to vomit as a
statement that says it's okay to for me
to be feel horrible but a smaller
version of this is I often speak to
groups and often they're in like hotel
ballrooms or in auditoriums and I'll
stop right in the middle of the speech
and say apropo of nothing is everyone
comfortable and they'll say yes and no
really truly is everyone are you
genuinely comfortable are you really
comfortable and they say yes go on with
your speech and then I say so how many
of you if you were sitting at home alone
if you were at home alone right now how
many of you would be in exactly the
position you're in at this moment and
nobody raises a hand and then I say why
not and they have to sit and think for a
long time before someone finally says
I'm not completely comfortable this
way and I would say well that's okay
because humans can tolerate a lot of
suffering and this is mild what concerns
me and should concern you is that 30
seconds ago you swore to me in broad
daylight that you were absolutely
comfortable well you're you knew you
weren't your body knew you weren't
comfortable and your mind was doing this
little this little trick where it goes
very quickly through this okay in order
to listen to speeches we sit in
uncomfortable positions and that's okay
because it's worth the benefit we get
out of it so given that I am tolerably
comfortable but all you think is I'm
comfortable when you're not comfortable
so people come to me and they're in jobs
where they're not comfortable in
relationships where they're like
sometimes in intense suffering in
religions where they're not comfortable
in all kinds of places and they're they
think they're comfortable but they're
getting sick they're getting getting
physically sick or they're getting
addicted to a substance because they're
trying to numb the discomfort they won't
acknowledge and so pretty much all I do
is help people get in touch with a
really really benevolent friend called
suffering when you know what makes you
suffer you're getting accurate
information from your entire
neurological system about what's working
for you and what isn't
and what would be better what would be
more comfortable just a little bit and
if you keep correcting I call them one
degree turns I would be a little more
comfortable doing this so I did the like
run off a cliff method don't do my way
do the one degree turns if you're in an
airplane and it turns one degree North
every half
hour over 10,000 miles you won't even
notice your turning but you'll be in a
completely different Place mhm and
that's just
noticing oh I'm this isn't very
comfortable for me I would rather do
this you know my girlfriend is anxious I
could break my back trying to figure out
what's going on and getting her enough
presents to make her happy or I could go
in the other room sit down be gentle
with myself maybe do a little writing
about how I feel that would be a little
more comfortable
it almost feels like we've been trained
not to listen to how we feel 100% 100%
as Sir Ken Robinson says you know we're
trained to think of our bodies as
mechanisms that take our heads to
meetings you know that the meetings are
all important and our heads are all
important and all the rest of our
evolution is meaningless to us that's a
very left hemisphere dominated way of
thinking and that's why Ian migil Chris
says live like people with right
hemisphere Strokes we're not even in our
bodies I think maybe you are more than
most people the way you talk about it
and the way you've made decisions
really it it speaks to me of a person
who finds what's right for him
very with a lot of
Integrity yeah well I think um I think
yeah one of the things I the reason I
say that is because I've been saying on
stage and wanted to see if you thought
it was true this idea CU people ask me
all the time they ask me about meaning
and purpose and what decision they
should make and should they quit their
job or quit their relationship and my
response for the last I'd say 12 months
has just been to try and impress upon
them that they were born with this thing
inside them which is how you feel yeah
and you you've learned not to listen to
it because your mother's opinion of
which university you go to has like
superseded it and Instagram has but I
know it's there because I know like
evolutionarily you wouldn't be here if
your body didn't have signals to tell
you to run to tell you to be scared to
tell to move away from this person so I
know it's there but you just probably
tuned it out yeah and um I say that to
people and I've almost never asked them
if that resonated with them but I just
just been saying it for a while so I
don't even know if it's like true but
it's just how I experience life CU my
decision like the reason why I'm like
here now is because of just I quit a lot
of stuff yes so like and I quit people
go you're so young it's like actually
it's not that I made great decisions
it's just I think the skill of quitting
was one that just came naturally to me
so like I don't like being at school
stopped going I don't like University I
left after the first lecture I started a
business did it for two years quit that
business out the blue started another
business did that one for six seven
years quit that one out of the blue I
love it and um it's it was all like the
I didn't need to have a place to go to I
didn't need to have like a better option
it was just this doesn't feel good I
love that but that's kind of running off
the cliff like thing is the the costs
are high and the rewards are high yeah
uh if you go gradually you're going to
get a small smaller amount of gain you
know by the year if you run off a cliff
you can have a really rough ride but you
might come out with a lot of positives
and your skill of quitting it reminds
me if people come to me I try to give
them every all the value in one session
like hear this and go away all right
take notes if you don't really want to
do something and you don't really have
to do something
don't do
it now give me my money and
go because that's the whole thing if you
don't want to do something and you don't
have to do it don't do it and that's a
really quick way to find out what you do
want what if you don't want to do it but
there's something telling you that you
have to so it could be like a horrible
work meeting or that that then you've
been invited to with that person which
you don't particularly like anyway that
baby shower you don't want to go to so I
like you have to get more and more
attentive to what's going on inside and
I I think some form of meditation
whether it's expressive writing or
painting or just sitting still is very
helpful at noticing these fine details
and and there's I'm kind of joking when
I say if you don't want to do it you
don't have to do it don't do it but
ultimately that's true and the way you
decide there are things that you don't
want to do but you actually do have to
do them not because people want you to
but because you have to do them and the
way I experienced that um I like to
describe it with something the Buddha
used to say a lot and that was whereever
you find a body of water you can know if
it's the sea because the sea always
tastes of salt and wherever you find
Enlightenment Awakening your own truth
your path you you can always recognize
it no matter what form it takes because
Enlightenment always tastes of
Freedom he did not say happiness he did
not say benefit he did not say you know
Mania true love he said
freedom and when you know like I did not
want to meet with my parents for example
in my therapist's office I was terrified
of both of them um and of the whole
community my therapist could have been
run out of business in the town we lived
in
um but if I had not done it I would not
have been as
free so I had to do
it but that's a really different I have
to do it than my mother really really
would be happier if I became a
doctor Freedom yeah what is freedom in
that definition of the word when I asked
you what your body felt when you started
paying attention to it and you said it
relaxed it's a sense
of I also mentioned flow um which is the
sense of being
completely almost the sense of self-
Disappearing and being in complete
harmony with something that is moving
through the world um my undergraduate
degree is in Chinese and so I know I
found out about dosm earlier in my life
and it's not really a religion the way
we would think of it it's the sense that
there is an energy that flows through
nature and that if you don't fight it
you
will you will live the life you were
meant to live and the sense of letting
go of everything else except letting
that thing work with you and through you
that to me is freedom when it comes to
food I trust my gut and I trust Zoe a
business I'm an investor in and today's
sponsor of this podcast all the
nutritionists I've spoken to have
highlighted just how misleading
information is out there when it comes
to food take healthy Halos the claims
you see on packaging that say things
like low sugar and nothing artificial
are often a sign of foods to avoid have
you ever noticed a health claim on fresh
fruit you probably get my point
understandably there's loads of distrust
out there who should you turn to for
accurate information I use Zoe which is
backed by one of the world's largest
microbiome databases and most
scientifically Advanced atome gut health
tests Zoe gives you proven science
whenever you need it as a Zoe member
you'll get an atome test kit and
personalized nutrition program to help
you make smarter food choices that
support your gut to sign up visit
zoe.com and use my code Steven 10 for
10% off your membership that's zoe.com
code step10 trust your gut trust Zoe
from the person you were at what 32
years old just before 32 years years old
you saying well through throughout your
teenagers teenage years to the person
you are
now how radical is the difference so if
I met that 19 year
olds teenager and she sat down here I
just went back for the first time in
years I I had a gig in Boston so I went
back to Cambridge which is next to it
and I went with my wife um something
that couldn't have happened when I was
17 I had the sense of tapping my younger
self on the shoulder and
saying I am I am from your future and I
can tell you with 100%
certainty that it is possible for you to
live in a state of almost continuous joy
and that you can get there without dying
you can get there in fact your job in
this world is to find a way to live in a
state of continuous Joy without dying
and if she turned to you and said Dr
Martha back what is step one what would
you say to her I would
say sit down with
yourself and find a part of you that can
say to your suffering which is
huge I love you it'll be okay I'm right
here and that's something I call it kind
internal selft talk and the acronym is
kissed and I didn't tell anyone about it
for DEC it's because it's so corny
sounding but that one thing in Tibetan
Buddhism they might call it the basis of
loving
kindness for years sometimes the monks
who are trained there and the nuns will
sit in meditation for days and days and
do nothing but offer kindness to
themselves themselves yeah it has to
start that way so you sit with your
miserable self and you say I would sit
with her and I would say maybe well
may you be happy may you be free from
suffering may you feel safe and
protected may you live with ease and as
I offer her those wishes I become the
part of myself that is
real because the suffering is the part
of the dream
world and the reality is infinitely
loving I
mean and intelligent Beyond so far
beyond our silly monkey
minds and we can align ourselves with
that and it's like a a Lifeline that I
could throw my younger self sometimes I
wonder if I
did the suffering is part of the dream
world oh yeah when you said that are you
referring to the the anxiety spiral and
those kinds of things oh yeah but also
the whole thing about we're all going to
die and everything's awful and um what
point is there to it anyway we you know
you suffering is certain and Death is
certain why don't we just get off the
bus now that kind of
thing that's that's the dream you know
that that everybody who's had the
Awakening
experience Dante said it Shakespeare
said it they're like we are such stuff
as dreams are made of Dante in the last
part of the Divine Comedy which I
believe is his description of his own
Enlightenment he looks back at the earth
once he's learned to love himself
and he calls it the little threshing
floor that so incites our savagery it's
nothing compared now he's with the
source of love in paradise and he
describes it as a rose unfolding and
unfolding and producing light and in
Asia the it's a Lotus same thing a many
petal flower that keeps opening and
opening very similar
imagery
and that's I I kind of feel that way
when you mentioned the part of me that
used to be so unhappy it's like oh
yeah yeah she thought that was
real but I
haven't and it is real the way a video
game is
real it's something that we I believe
that con our Consciousness projects this
life of misery and and even materiality
I happen to think
that Ma matter is not Consciousness is
not made by matter matter is made by
Consciousness and Consciousness is
primary and nobody has the vaguest clue
what Consciousness actually is but we
have it so it must exist and that was
that was what deart said he actually we
say he said Cojo goome I think therefore
I am he actually said I don't know
anything but I doubt everything and the
fact that I doubt means that I'm
thinking so I must exist he said Doo
cojito AOS I doubt therefore I think
therefore I am so when you get to this
place where you're willing to let your
mind go wide
open not closed around oh there's an
afterlife where we sit on clouds and no
I have no idea what happens when we die
but my mind is
open and the mind we were the minds we
are taught to have by this culture are
closed like Fists whether it's around a
religion
or a sort of atheistic science because
real science has to be open to the
mystery people experience it you can't
just rule that
out
so yeah I think that what we're
experiencing is a real projection of
Consciousness but I think Consciousness
is something much vaster and more
infinite and enduring than matter
one of the things you talked about was
when you saw the light um during that
surgery like when people hear you say
you saw a light during surgery people
think well you're on morphine or
something yeah were you on morphine uh I
don't remember exactly which anesthesia
they is but I
asked so I'm in
surgery
um they're operating on me I look around
I sit up and then I think why am I
sitting up I'm having surgery I look
down there's my body they're operating
on it and I was like this is weird so I
lay back down and there were bright
surgical lights and the light that
appeared between them was just small at
first like a golf ball and it was they
they tell us we only see a trillionth of
the available light spectrum H we only
see the a trillionth of the colors that
we could that
exist and I think I could see trillions
more colors than I'd ever seen before
and it was absolutely
mesmerizing you could not you would
never want to look away from it and then
it got bigger in my case and it touched
my body and the this feeling of absolute
Exquisite
Joy just coursed through me and
um and it was the realest thing I'd ever
seen so much realer than the body that
was being operated on and and um
it was laughing with joy and I was
laughing with joy and I started to cry
because I was it was pure relief pure
happiness and the surgeons noticed tears
coming out of my eyes and they thought I
could feel the surgery and that the
anesthesia wasn't strong enough so they
were like oh my God oh my God she's
feeling this and the anesthesiologist
was freaked out um and then I really
didn't notice the rest cuz I was busy
with other things but the moment I woke
up I was like bring me the
anesthesiologist please actually I
couldn't stop crying for hours because I
loved everyone so much and I was just
like everybody that was there there was
a janitor I was like I love you so much
um so they brought me the
anesthesiologist and he was he seemed
terrified which I didn't understand now
I do he was afraid that he'd done
something wrong because so I said what
did you give me what are the side
effects what happens to people under
this surgery what goes on and he said he
said just tell me what
happened and I said what do you mean and
he said well I was going to give you
more medication and then a voice said
don't do that she's crying because she's
happy and he said I just listen to it
and I don't know
why and he was like did I do the right
thing and so I told him a little bit it
was still I never thought I'd tell
anyone this story I've ended up telling
it over and over um and the memory of it
never Fades at all it's not like a
typical memory and and he said do you
know how many times this has happened to
me in 33 years of giving people
anesthesia I said how many and he said
once and then he gave me a kiss on the
forehead and went away so I don't think
it was a drug effect why truth emerged
from that because you say from what I've
understood that you you vowed not to lie
yeah in any way like not with my actions
not with even my facial expressions and
the reason
was I had heard the truth will set you
free i' had studied so many wisdom
Traditions looking everywhere for a
reason not to commit suicide I mean I
had really looked I knew a lot of
religious texts philosophical texts I
had done my homework and over and over
and over and over it said the truth will
set you free I was like in Mormonism
they said the truth is what we've
written down here and it was bogus and
phony and I was like no um but the light
was far more true than anything else I'd
ever experienced it was far more real so
I was like okay if truth takes me there
and it told me not verbally but it said
look you've been thinking that you could
kill yourself and feel better and I am
telling you that you are meant to learn
to feel this way the way you feel with
me
now when you're alive always so go and
do that and what I really did was I made
it wasn't even a choice it was
a it was a absolute Obsession I would
not live in such a way that I was not
conscious of the presence of that light
and that meant every time I lied you
felt help week you got when you just
said something that wasn't true I felt
it withdraw or myself it you can't
withdraw from it it's everywhere I
believe but I felt myself less conscious
of it I was like okay that's not going
to work so I decided what I'm going to
do is I'm just going to say what's real
do what's real if a thought comes in
that feels like it's pulling me away
from that light I will question that
thought it can't be real it doesn't Set
Me Free it doesn't bring me into that
I'm going to I'm going to just in
investigate
everything until I find what feels
truest to me knowing by the way that as
one of my favorite Indian sages says the
only true statement the mind can make is
I do not know because we could be
dreaming all this we could be fed
misinformation we could be deep faked I
don't know any I mean with this little
monkey
brain I don't
know but in Asia they have this concept
of don't know mind where the mind is
wide open and not clenched around
anything and then you can experience a
sort of it's the humility of
surrendering your Primacy the Primacy of
human intelligence to something so much
bigger and still being human and having
that be a good thing but just not
mistaking it for
godhood as part of you stepping in when
you step into your truth so you the the
body knows from what you've said the
body has a lives in a better State a
less anxious State I imagine oh yeah you
know what it is when people think about
stepping into their truth they the
reason they probably don't is because
there's consequence to that or at least
there's
apparent yes shortterm apparent
consequence I might lose my
job when people think of Truth they
think of like speaking your mind in in
the modern world you speak your mind you
might lose everything well you you ask
yourself is it kind is it true is it
necessary so you don't say every little
thing that crosses your mind and you
don't do it in ways that are unkind but
yes you may feel that you know I felt I
had to formally leave Mormonism which to
my entire Community o of of childhood
and young adulthood was the sin worse
than murder I was going to Outer
Darkness it was Absolut I used to walk
down the street once I'd done this and
people would physically turn their backs
friends right so but I had to so that
was a place where yes there was a huge
consequence a and there will be I sort
of position it as your true nature
versus culture and by culture I mean
anything from a couple's culture to a
family culture to a religious to ethnic
National whatever if you serve your true
nature there will come a time when you
become countercultural you do something
that is not what your parents approved
of or it's not what your religion taught
um how do you know what your true nature
is is there such an exercise one can go
through to figure it out yeah the
absence of all suffering psychological
suffering okay so okay so the absence of
all psychological suffering is my true
nature so is my psychological suffering
caused by
being not in my true nature yeah it's
caused by innocently
believing lies you were taught by one of
two
forces socialization or trauma trauma
tells you oh my God everything's
dangerous all the time and it's gets
lodged in the brain and socialization
says things like you're not good enough
you should try harder that was a bad
choice you've got to please your mother
all kinds of things we all have them and
if if you want to please your mother and
you have that it's great if you're true
nature and your culture go together
there's no conflict like I loved School
my true nature natur fit that culture
but then my oldest child who's brilliant
it did not fit that child's culture and
yet I forced my kid to go through school
and we've talked about a lot since I
wish I hadn't done that I was young I
had my kids young
and I forced my child to conform with a
culture that went against her true
nature
and it it caused a lot of suffering you
suffer oh still yeah I was really really
kind of as deeply sad after the last
American
election um deeply sad but never afraid
anymore not anxious and and even you
know the grieving process when you lose
someone you're going to grieve deeply
and that's a sequence of you know denial
anger bargaining sadness there's kind of
a they put him in a list uh El Abeth
Kubler Ross put them in a list of things
you experience when you lose someone or
you're going to die and um it's actually
more like being in a cement mixer it
just all happens at once but I actually
wouldn't count that as suffering it is a
process a Peruvian Shaman once told me
compassion is the evolution of
Consciousness in the healing of trauma
and the healing of trauma is the
grieving process
so if you're grieving I would sit with
you and I would bring you you know warm
drinks and put a blanket around you and
I would cry with you and feel with
you and love
you but that's not the same to me as
psychological suffering which is that
anguished feeling of I just don't want
to be here this is
bad as part of you stepping into your
truth you realized that the relationship
you were in with your husband at the
time
mhm was not the relationship you wanted
no um he was gay and trying so hard not
to be gay um and when he was Mormon so
it was very convenient for me because I
was I I was in love with him very much
in love I and I think he really really
loved me too I know he did we got
married when I was 20 we were we were
delivered by the same obstetrician like
we had a very similar life path and then
we both went to Harvard which was very
unusual for people from our hometown so
we had so much in common and we were
best friends and um loved each other
deeply and he was trying desperately not
to be gay I wasn't conscious of being
gay because I wasn't conscious of
anything much I was so disassociated
because of sexual abuse that I just
didn't know where I stood he just made
me feel safe and I loved that um but
then when we started questioning
Mormonism and the sexual abuse came up
and everything I was just and even
before that it was really
obvious that I
said when I was pregnant with my son I
started having psychic experiences I'm
sorry they just happened I had to allow
them I was getting my doctorate at
Harvard and now I was having psychic
flashes what do you do with that you
either throw it away which means
throwing away the evidence the data or
you blow your mind open and one of the
things that happened was I started to be
able to see what was happening with
people I loved when I wasn't there just
in flashes but very verifiable I could
call them and do it and when that would
happen my husband was traveling a lot
and I just knew he was gay and I knew
that's what was right for him and that
his Joy was part of homosexuality and
and he was still quite
religious and wanted to be a good boy
the way he'd been taught to be and so I
think he went through a lot of Anguish I
know he did we talked about it and it
wasn't until we both left the church
that I I said you know I'm gay you're
gay why don't we just be gay and um and
so he started dating men and I fell in
love with a woman and I'm still with her
and eight years
ago as I said
you go into countercultural things when
you follow your truth um another woman
who was visiting us the place where we
were living the three of us started
hanging out and we could not stop
hanging out with each other and it's
very weird for three people to all fall
in love with each other but that's what
happened eight years ago and it was
so it's a good thing we were living out
in the forest because the cultural
pressures against that are huge but I we
were living in a national forest there
were no people around and it was just
like well okay then this feels
awesome and eight nine years later it
still feels awesome there really is
something to that there really is
something to this idea that when you
follow your truth you'll live a
countercultural life yeah do you know
how embarrassing it is for me to sit and
tell people yeah not only am I gay but I
have two partners not I don't think it's
embarrassing I've Got Friends that I've
got a good friend of mine that's um uh
that is in married but also in love with
another couple so they're they're like a
four and they like raise the kids
together and stuff and yeah I mean
there's nothing it's it's this sounds so
strange to say but for me to me it's
actually quite inspiring because it must
take a lot
of something to accept that people are
going to be judgmental and to do it
anyway yeah I'm like oh God I wish I had
the like if that's how I felt would I be
the type of person that would be strong
enough to follow that feeling if that's
like how I felt or would I just bat the
feeling away I actually think I'd bat
the feeling away and I don't like that
about myself because of because of
consequence and the consequence for me
would be in my head it would be quite
grave yeah because you're a public
figure so it's going to be written about
everywhere and people are going to think
they're going to Tweet me all day saying
Steve's dating five people or whatever
oh when this happened when I realized
when the three of us realized we were
actually f for for several weeks we were
like this is normal right it's very
normal for three people to sit very
close together on the same couch and
talk for hours um and then finally I was
like oh oh my God I'm in love with both
of you and they were like yeah we're
we're all in love with both of each
other and I I said it's fine for you too
I'm on an Integrity cleanse and I have
to tell the truth all the time to a lot
of
people um but the it was like being hit
by a train the joy that came with that I
remember Karen uh my original partner
who'd been with me for like 22 years at
the time um she came to me and she sat
me down and she said I've been I've been
spending a lot of time with
Rowan um who's this other lady yeah this
this riter from Australia who had come
to do some work in the US and she was
staying with us for a while but not with
us with some other people on a
neighboring property and Karen said yeah
we've been hanging out and I I just um
I'm having very very strong feelings
it's like it's kind of like like a fire
hose of love and I don't know if it's
like maybe spiritual or and I remember
just smiling at her the way you do with
your friends when they were in love and
going you're in love with her and I
looked inside myself
for any fear any anger any jealousy
nothing there was it was like an
explosion of pure joy just Joy Beyond
Joy Beyond joy and I was like this is
amazing does she feel the same way about
you bring her tell her to come here
let's let's all get to know each other
this is awesome I'll move into the guest
room and you guys can to have the master
bedroom and there will be more love in
this
house and that's just how it felt and
that's how it's felt to me ever since
and that's my alternative to feeling
suicidal Ro calls it um Feeling Good by
looking weird
H and is that how it's been how many
years now four years did you say so
eight years
wow is it
difficult it's like now I just think
about how do couples do it and it's like
a two-legged stool how would that even
work like you need the balance of three
like if somebody gets in an argument
who's the referee and a like how do you
even do that with two people so it very
quickly it felt so
natural you have to communicate a lot
and there is one of the things is none
of us is capable of lying we just we're
out of practice I I don't think either
of them ever had a tendency to lie to
themselves or anyone else so you're
always telling each other the truth and
there's not there's a weird kind of
Harmony among people who are forming
Community with total authenticity and
and
openness we talked earlier on about
meaning and purpose you said the
billionaires when they come to you but
really anyone that comes to you is all
trying to figure
out their path in life their their
meaning yeah their purpose it's a big
big
question what are the lies we're sold
about finding our purpose because I have
a lot of kids in my DMs that DM me and
say Steve I can't find my passion or I
can't find my purpose or I can't and I
never really know what to say to them um
I think one thing I wrote In one of my
books a long time ago was that I
realized this when I was pregnant with
my son and I realized he would have Down
syndrome and be intellectually delayed
and I thought what is the meaning of his
life what is the purpose of his life and
then somehow I
realized um because of my love for him
that the meaning of life is not what
happens to people the meaning of life
the per your purpose in life is what
happens between people so it's in the
meeting you have a home in South Africa
so you know about Ubuntu yeah bought the
house this year so I mean I've been
working a lot and uh it's only really at
the end of the year that I get to go
there so I don't I don't really know
South Africa well yet well the concept
of Ubuntu I think is is dominant
throughout a lot of Africa um and it
mean there's no English translation and
it is completely the opposite of our
cultural
individualism and the meaning of Ubuntu
is basically I am me because we are us I
am fundamentally different because I
know you and you matter to me and I used
to uh be confused in South Africa
because I knew there were a lot of AIDS
orphans and I never saw them on the
streets or anything and then I realized
that Ubuntu is a real practical thing
there and that the children who are left
are absorbed into Community by people
who may have nothing except
Ubuntu and Ubuntu they um
there's a Chinese proverb that says if
you want to go fast go alone if you want
to go far go together so we've been
going really fast in this culture fast
toward our own
destruction I am me because because I am
because we are is the closest thing you
can say to it but conceptually it
means the the space between us so that's
another thing you can do an exercise you
can do to get into your right hemisphere
so so we're looking at each other but if
you look instead of without moving your
eyes look at the distance between
us look at the openness between
us you feel how it changes your gaze
yeah how it changes your
heartbeat this is how people like Carl
Yung the psychologist had a dear friend
who was a Pueblo Indian and he said what
do you really think of us anglos and he
said we think you're
insane and he said why and this guy's
name was Chief Mountain Lake he said
you're always staring at things and yet
you never see each other you never see
what's between you and our eyes are soft
and yours are hard and when you and I
just did that my whole body went into a
state of
it's like the light you know it's like
that light is more is I'm more conscious
of it when I'm looking at the space
between us and I feel you MH I don't
just see you I felt like my heart rate
dropped yeah so in mind that's kind of
how I just felt really calm yeah and I
was thinking about I was trying to look
at the space in between yeah so I'm
trying right now to start building
communities of Ubuntu I I started one
online just to Foster people's
creativity and help them move into this
state of being and it's called Wilder
because when we were
Wilder that's how we looked at each
other that's how your dog and your cat
look at you that's why we love being
with them because they look at us and
they look at the space between us and
their eyes are
soft and if there's a fly that goes by
they'll get
sharp and that's the hunting Instinct
but then when they're looking at
something they love they're looking at
the whole space and feeling each other
so someone sendss me a DM and says I
can't find my purpose in life what do
you suggest I
respond it's say first of
all sit down and offer love to the part
of you that's in so much stress because
you can't find your purpose that's a
horrible feeling MH you know your
purpose but you can't find it because
it's being drowned out by what you've
been taught and that hurts and I'm
really sorry because I know that pain go
and sit down or find a friend find
someone trustworthy find community and
tell them what me Mary Oliver says tell
me about despair yours and I will tell
you mine and she talks about the wild
geese announcing your place in the
family of things when you can
communicate your Despair and feel heard
and feel
connected and what happens between
people
will fill in the gaps in your knowledge
and you'll realize
ah my purpose is where my deep gladness
and the world's deep hunger
meet and I can feel that when I love
when I and it love is not like goopy
gipi it's my deep gladness yeah that's
from Fredick bner who was a theologian
German Theologian he said your mission
is like in life is where your deep
gladness and the world's deep hunger
meet so what you just described a young
person reaching out to you and saying
what is my purpose and you are asking
yourself what do I say so you're looking
at the relationship between this young
person and you and you are in Ubuntu
you're looking at the space between you
and your deep
gladness is
to heal the scars and wound wounds in
this person you've never met but who is
deeply hungry for something the culture
is not giving him or her or
them that's your deep gladness and their
deep
hunger and you've been serving that
really well like so much better than
most people I've met in my
life and by Deep gladness what I how I
interpreted that was the thing that
makes me happy or the thing that makes
me feel good yeah that's kind of an it's
kind of people could take that a number
of different ways this is deep gladness
it's something you feel in in your
viscera it's something it's
like the most here's another way to get
into it imagine a time when you were
with a creature you loved and it's
probably easier if it was an animal than
if it was a person it was a person it
has to be a baby so somebody who
couldn't talk my son can't really talk
so I get this with him a lot and
remember a time when you relaxed
completely into the presence of this
other being and the cat was purring on
your chest or the dog had his head on
your lap and there was no pressure to do
anything you're being
human with this other being in a space
that you have created that we've all
created with our Consciousness for the
joy of its beauty and its darkness and
its light
and there's
just Psalm
46 says it says the name of God like six
different ways be still and know that I
am God be is a name for God Stillness is
a name for God no is a name for God I am
is a name for God and God is a name for
God
and when
you when you feel all of that as what
you fundamentally are and it's
connecting with another
person the gladness doesn't even touch
it no word can touch it but it's two
aspects of a Consciousness that thought
they were separate joining hands and
meeting each other again and the reunion
is overwhelmingly
beautiful relief
Joy gladness light all of
it how has the internet messed this all
up it's messed it up and it's made it
possible you know like it's messed it up
horribly by feeding on our culture's
obsession with those left hemisphere
what bleeds leads right we have that
negativity bias and what people want to
do is monetize their position on the
internet and the best way to monetize
your position is to get the Lion's Share
of attention and whatever gets the
Lion's Share of attention is a cobra
versus a puppy so there's uh there's a
psychological and monetary pressure
always pushing the internet to frighten
us more or to make us more angry at each
other to divide and polarize us it's
like this left hemisphere weapon that
has just gone
berserk and so like in America there are
these pockets of such extremely polar
ized
political belief systems that all have
their own information sets and I don't
know what the hell's true um but they
all believe absolutely the way the left
hemisphere believes there's no open
mind on the other
hand you know when the brain wakes up
when it has the Awakening experience it
the fruit ripens and ripens and then it
falls okay so that I think may be this
epigenetic switch going on in the brain
and it flashes to the whole brain and
changes
everything and I like to think of
fractals the different units of of
nature that tend to reproduce at larger
sizes like a twig is like a branch is
like the trunk of a tree so our brains
may be like us
this our neocortex is very thin it's
just this thin surface of cells around
the surface of the brain very very
interactive and we are kind of like that
we're running around the surface of a
sphere being very very interactive and
teaching each other ideas and if just
one person awakens you know Buddha was
awake Jesus was
awake and Buddha never tried to save
anybody but himself you know but other
Minds caught
that that configuration they switched
on and because
because we have the
internet what used to take a whole
national government to do to communicate
with everyone in the
world could happen from like a poor kid
in Mal Malawi who suddenly awakened and
was able to put that into a
message um or you know Malala youf like
everyone knows what this 15-year-old
girl went through even though the
information would have been suppressed
by the talibon if they could have done
it but they can't do it
anymore so one awakened person now has
the potential to touch the lives of
literally everyone virtually for free do
you interact with the internet much I do
um and I know that I am shaping an
algorithm that is totally unrealistic
because my My World online is primarily
otter I loves me and Otter
and but like it's it's all the examples
of love and joy that occur between
people and I and then I look at the
headlines and I'm like yeah yeah yeah
but here you know when I first went to
Africa I'd heard it's the Dark Continent
everything is bad Ebola War the Congo
all these terrible things the Heart of
Darkness and then I went there and
realized that for every horrible thing
that legitimately does happen in that
place there are maybe a thousand acts of
completely Selfless
Love
I I would walk around I every time I go
there I think I look at the people who
have been colonized you know the
original people and I think I'm white if
I were you I'd be really mad at me like
why and yet I was there we had my um
wife had a little girl a few years ago
she's a bit younger than I am and she
got sick in the air port in Johannesburg
really sick and she was barfing
everywhere and we were just pushing the
stroller from one tourist store we'd get
a bunch of t-shirts and she'd throw up
on that and we'd put her in another one
and throw the first one away and
people came running to us from the
different stores and they were from you
know there are 11 different national
languages there there were people from
different tribal
legacies and instead of running away
from a vomiting child
they ran toward us with everything they
could find to help someone lit a fire
and sterilized a spoon someone ran down
the airport to the only Pharmacy to get
the right medication and ran back with
it people were holding the vomit stained
clo I mean these were people we had
never
met and this was the place I'd been
afraid of because I had let myself
believe the stories that polarized me
and said oh that's a dark scary place it
every place is dark and scary and
everywhere there are human beings there
is the capacity for
Ubuntu
and what there is to
love the part of us that loves is
infinitely more powerful than the part
of us that
doesn't
amen what is the um what is the most
important
thing in your new book beyond anxiety
curiosity creativity and finding your
life's purpose that we haven't talked
about
yet I would
say it's I wish I could I don't know how
to get it how to say this clearly enough
and I've said it
here but what is the most important
thing that anyone listening to this you
specifically right now wherever you are
and I just mentioned Mary Oliver is the
wild geese one of the things she says no
matter who you are no matter how lonely
no whoever you are no matter how lonely
the world offers itself to your
imagination you are part of the family
of things so whoever hears this you
specifically in your essence you are
safe no matter what it looks like you
are fundamental mentally going to be
okay I
promise that's
it Dr Martha backck we have a closing
tradition on the podcast where the last
guest leaves a question for the next
guest not knowing who they're leaving
the question for okay and the question
that has been left for you is o
this is a tricky
[Music]
one and you can interpret this however
you wish okay what do you think
separates a great story from just a good
story
easy in a good story bad things happen
to good people in a great story bad
things happen to
Heroes cuz there's always conflict
and there's
always
suffering and that can be just like oh
that was awful but the great Stories the
ones we keep telling are the ones where
the person who would be a victim becomes
a Creator who says I'm not going to stay
in fear I'm going to make something from
this and they F they stand up and they
go out on an
adventure and what looks like it could
have been a tragedy becomes an adventure
Venture that's what Shakespeare did at
the end of his life I was taught at
Harvard that he wrote the four Great
tragedies where everything ends in
horror and ni Annihilation that was his
high point and then he started writing
these romances which are so stupid
because they have like magic and
forgiveness and happy endings and I was
actually told he did that because he was
scile he was 50 you
know the tragedies are amazing Stories
and the
romances those are the great ones as far
as I'm concerned cuz that's where the
tragedy becomes an adventure that ends
well a good story is when bad things
happen to good people but a great story
is when bad things happen to Heroes
Heroes because the good it's when the
what the good people do with that do
they suffer it or do they make it the
material of invention do they let it be
a weight of lead or they perform an
alchemy that turns it into gold and all
the great stories that last forever are
the ones about alchemy where suffering
turns to something wonderful is this a
choice that we have I do believe it is
not always like if you're a little kid
or if you're a young person out there if
you're a working mom or someone in
poverty or someone who's just had a
terminal diagnosis of course you're
going to feel you're not just going to
want to jump up and do something
heroic be kind be kind be kind be kind
be gentle to
yourself and if you're gentle for just a
while you're going to start to say
instead of what am I going to do about
this you're going to say what can I make
from this and that shifts you into the
mode of the
creative and as you start to make
something of your situation you become
part of the
creation
and that's when you wake up from your
nightmare and to me that's the best
ending of any
story you clearly have a great story oh
thank you so do you because you are
clearly someone that is a good person
that bad things happened to um now
you're a person where bad things have
happened to someone that me and many
others consider to be hero because of
all the wonderful things that you've
done but you're it's interesting because
I thought I understood the subject
matter of anxiety um and I think I was
of the mind that it's something you
attack you throw things at you know much
of society says the key to curing
anxiety is just you throw pills at it or
something else but you've given me a
whole new perspective on what it is and
also how to navigate in a world that's
increasingly more anxious and I'm sure
you've done that for many other people
in a way that's really really honest um
really rooted in science and really
accessible I hope so thank you so much
that's what I that's genely the words
that I that I mean I'm not lying to you
thank so I highly recommend anybody
who's resonated with any of this
conversation please go and get this book
it's fantastic it's it has these
wonderful areas where um you can engage
with the book and there's some like
sections that you can write in um but
it's just a wonderful book and I think
it's a wonderful book for anybody that's
struggling and I say struggling or
suffering in all your forms that's
trying to understand what that means and
how to channel it into your own hero's
journey of sorts so Dr Martha Beck thank
you so much it's been such an honor and
privilege to meet and um I hope we have
more conversations in the future I hope
so the honor is all mine thank you so
much isn't this cool every single
conversation I have here on the Diary of
a CEO at the very end of it you'll know
I asked the guest to leave a question in
the Diary of a CEO and what we've done
is we' turned every single question
written in the Diary of a CEO into these
conversation cards that you can play at
home so you've got every guest we've
ever had their question and on the back
of it if you scan that QR code you get
to watch the person who answered that
question we're finally revealing all of
the questions and the people that
answered the question the brand new
version 2 updated conversation cards are
out right now at Theon conversation
cards.com they've sold out twice
instantaneously so if you are interested
in getting hold of some limited edition
conversation cards I really really
really recommend acting quickly
[Music]